this is episode three of the AR ni Oh
Chinese language course way back in
episode two I insinuated I hinted at a
distinction between Connie and other
less flattering words for political
protests let me tell you something in
this life
one man's protest is another man's riot
when you when you look at this
photograph do you do you see a protest
or do you see a riot when I first saw
this headline gee a tie so this is not a
quotation from the article this is just
the headline of the article I assumed
this was going to be about Thailand
because Thai Ghul is the way we say
Thailand in modern Standard Mandarin
Chinese but no tiata is actually
Catalonia this is the short form of the
name of the country Catalonia in Chinese
right so yet I saw LuAnn GC hey so many
she the next part of the headline is
somewhat bizarre if you recognize the
word hoodia you can guess the meaning
this is suggesting to you that there are
continuing riots in Catalonia as part of
a butterfly effect somehow indirectly
linked to the protests or the riots in
Hong Kong you can probably read about
the same events for example recent
protests in Hong Kong and one newspaper
might describe it as a protest and
another may describe it as a riot I'll
have my lovely assistant read the show
to you in perfect Chinese in just a
moment but the sentence begins Shen Gong
Wu ji teach young padawan I think you
might just want to skip the word tan Wan
we're gonna cover a lot of vocabulary in
this lesson here the meaning is economic
paralysis in other context it would mean
paralysis in the sense of a physical
disease but now let's hear the sentence
as a whole given that Hong Kong Airport
has been paralyzed would we really call
these protests or would we call this a
riot sound Conchords it's you trying
time quiet
kind you hi she's so long my lovely
assistant is reading you a real world
example of a headline on a news item
tangy hi
Solan is this a protest or is this a
riot
puggy hi she's so bad you may have
noticed that there are some words I
dwell on for quite a long time and there
are some I skip over quickly because
some of these words they're not merely
more interesting but there are words or
characters you will use intensively
starting from level one in Chinese so I
did not spend any time at all discussing
the word for paralysis whereas LUN Cong
and E three of these four characters we
started this episode with those are
characters you really need to know those
are characters you are going to be using
intensively already at level one in
speaking reading and writing Chinese if
English is your second language you need
to memorize the word riot just for that
one context just for that one meaning
and then the word riot will only come up
in rare and extraordinary circumstances
when you're talking about politics and
history and so on but then one half of
the word for riot in Chinese actually is
a character that you're going to see and
use day after day already at level one
in Chinese that's because Chinese unlike
English will take this one character and
use it in different combinations with a
range of remarkable meanings so studying
Chinese is in this way quite
intellectually stimulating here we see
LUN hand written on a sign here in the
mountains of central Taiwan so I took
this photograph myself I was walking
down the street and I noticed this sign
someone had put up and this also draws
our attention to the tremendous
challenge ordinary people have in coping
with the complexity of the Chinese
language this is not calligraphy
but the person who wrote this using a
felt-tip marker you can imagine they
really took some time to write this
correctly and you can see none is
correctly assembled from each of its
constituent parts even though it doesn't
quite have the verb of outright
calligraphic Chinese and you can imagine
this person was really quite angry and
frustrated with people leaving litter
leaving garbage on their tiny garden in
the front of their house and I I would
assume it took them at least 30 minutes
to write out this this sign once you get
into writing short essays you also will
realize how tremendously time-consuming
it is to write something out by hand in
the Chinese language as opposed to
typing it on a computer and typing it on
your phone
many many Chinese people I would say
today the majority of Chinese people can
type done but would not be capable of
writing it correctly and accurately even
though as I've been emphasizing LUN is
not just a character you're gonna see
associated with riots it's not just
gonna come up in the discussion of
politics and history this is in fact a
symbol that comes up every day in your
life living in China or speaking Chinese
precisely because it has these other
uses like Lando so how are you possibly
going to remember and practice writing
this character LUN accurately this is
where the study of Chinese etymology is
not merely of historical interest but is
a very real practical value in our lives
here and now look at the top left corner
of the screen you'll see that I'm
drawing your attention to the
resemblance between done and very common
level one vocabulary like it's high
you're looking there at the symbol or
the radical of a hand reaching downward
at the bottom of the left hand side of
lon you then have a hand reaching upward
and that particular symbol for hand in
the bottom left corner the
character could be familiar to you from
common characters like the yo in Ponyo
Ponyo meaning friend again level 1
vocabulary in between the two hands you
have a confusing mess of brushstrokes
what this is very imperfectly rendering
in 21st century Chinese silk on a loom
being worked by two hands coming
together there is a very close
resemblance between this LUN and the
common character rule rule is a word
that vegans need to get familiar with
immediately it's used more like our word
dari in English rather than the word
milk itself so dairy products if you're
reading the ingredients on the side of
packaged processed food you really need
to learn to watch out for a rule it also
does mean breast and breast milk and so
on so sometimes it does mean breast in
reference to human anatomy and sometimes
the meaning is dairy as in dairy
products like yogurt and so on um top
left corner of rule again you can see
this radical of a hand reaching downward
the bottom left corner is the child
I guess you say the child's growing
upward in the center of the screen you
see a really ancient attempt to draw
this character where it is a true
pictograph you can see the mother
embracing the child but on the right
hand side of the screen you see the way
in which this was stylized or
systematized into three separate
radicals the hand reaching down the
child reaching upward and then the
single line on the right hand side of
the character is here supposed to
symbolize the human breast in this case
we really do know the whole history of
this written character we know the
symbolic meaning of each of its parts
and how they're assembled to have a new
symbolic meaning as a whole this is rare
this is extraordinary
and this also were
of the limitations of Chinese etymology
the limitations of breaking characters
down into their pieces and offering an
analysis component by component because
the truth is the single hooked
brushstroke on the right hand side of
rule does not have the same symbolic
meaning or value when we see it on the
right hand side of blood we are
encouraged to imagine that on the right
hand side of one this is a stray strand
of thread whereas the character as a
whole is depicting two hands coming
together and working with a bundle of
silk thread and then this one line is a
strand of thread that got away that
sounds to me like a story that
schoolteachers made up rather than a
real etymology of the character but in
any case these are the limitations of
learning the characters component by
component but if you don't learn the
etymology in history of the characters
you are just left with having to
memorize a mess of meaningless lines but
there's good news the good news is once
you put in the effort to learn these
incredibly difficult characters they
come up again and again even within
level one vocabulary back in Episode two
this word come where this character Cong
came up in two very different contexts
we talked about kanji meaning to protest
a political protest a protest march but
it also came up in the history of
China's war against Japan and this same
character Kong I even see it every day
Here I am holding up proudly a household
cleaning product known you're gonna see
it on store shelves you're gonna see it
every time you go to the pharmacy or the
grocery store Kang Jun antibacterial in
some contexts we would say antibiotic
the word for antibiotic or antibacterial
is a struggle against bacteria in the
same way that in a political and
historical context we talk about the war
being a struggle
against the Japanese in situation for
the you Buddha health commissioner you
Norman Bethune of the canadian-american
medical unit reporting for duty
Tommy you don't do 8/3 John Norman Bates
you in 70 bother well you know who are
you me I faked my death
[Music]
well a bunch of junk war become you
changing ezel Fantini la tho junk war
there are many many ways to express the
purpose of an action in Chinese there
are many ways to say that you are doing
one thing in order to accomplish another
but the teacher I worked with in Kunming
China for many months she always
insisted to me that I should avoid using
whele altogether I think this is partly
because of the gap between written
Chinese and spoken Chinese sometimes
they seem like two separate languages I
would guess it's also because of the gap
between textbook Chinese the somewhat
simplified way the chinese has taught to
foreigners and the reality of how native
Chinese speakers actually communicate
whether in writing or in speech but I
was told again and again and again no
don't use whele and what you see here on
screen this sentence fragment it's not
really even a complete sentence does
indeed be kid with whele so in order to
help China in its struggle against Japan
remember we learned kung earlier in this
episode so this is normally translated
as the anti-japanese war
congra john-john well a bunch of junk
war become you changing and then we have
the date when he arrived in China
he's old Fantine you lie though junk
wall as I've no shared with you my
teachers warning that whele should be
avoided perhaps in our own written
compositions and when speaking Chinese
as foreigners how about I give you an
alternative here is the sentence pattern
wait this show this is a slightly
hilarious example from my favorite
textbook see if you can guess what
happens next
I've highlighted the word pay just in
case you don't know it or maybe you
don't know any of the vocabulary in this
sentence pay is the main verb
when I was first learning Chinese it
always helped me immensely if I could
figure out which words were the verbs in
the sentence and then sort of see the
rest of the sentence structure organized
around that had some Alipay poverty
cheating some fall even if you're
starting at level one or level zero in
Chinese you should get the general drift
that this is a question with Zimmy and
then we have a reply that's going to
begin with we do show we this is
gonna tell us in order to do something
it's going to tell us the purpose of an
action so the question is had someone
low pay you've already been warned that
pay is the main verb in the sentence but
pay is one of those words that your
teachers and textbooks will conspire to
avoid teaching you and no not for any
kind of political reason but just
because it's unbelievably confusing and
not too terribly useful look I know that
pay and Boo are two completely different
words but you have to admit if you were
confronted with these two symbols on the
final exam on a multiple-choice test you
you might get them mixed up it's essay
composition or whatever I think the
teachers and textbooks have just decided
that the world would be a better place
if foreigners could get through their
first few years of studying Chinese
without having to learn and practice the
difference between pay and Boo because
they are too painfully similar looking
Chinese characters so our first sentence
is asking why does she always accompany
her son to the gym gentian fan gym and
then our answer comes with way to show
and look guys I got to admit to you some
of these things in language they come
down to a matter of opinion my teacher
was of the opinion that we should have
wanted using whele and I'm of the
opinion that way tisha sounds more
conversational sounds more like
real-world 21st century Chinese and this
is a very conversational colloquial
real-world 21st century Chinese answer
wait is she young Potter Pollard's is
if a so why does she always go with her
son to the gym you could translate this
as in order to help her son lose weight
you could translate it as that she's
allowing her son to lose weight in some
context the verb rung really is more
like allow but probably here in plain
English to make her son lose weight and
the function of weight issue beginning
the sentence lets you know that the
answer is going to tell you the purpose
or the objective that the question was
asking about abdominal bullet means we
must work fast
football total death that's he's lost
too much blood
we must give him a transfusion
immediately to Chicago tomorrow sushi
you see a jump on you want Li Ling quite
sure what a shred tortilla so what is
dr. with Yoon doing in this dramatic
scene
yo ETN EAGA Xiang Yun Jie Auto Show shoe
sho shoe is operation show sure young un
champion note that we've had this word
Yin before we talked about it at some
length in earlier episode here it gives
us the sense of a wounded person more
often we know it from words that mean a
staff member an employee or communist
party member
right you need the shunran's realtor
show show show you a Leo said hey door
eating Camilla handle Jew don't sink wha
bout will and I for sure
young chui's year Louie teon eager Chang
Hyun soo Yeon soo show shoe shagging do
sheer tidal shall do it hey dual he's
lost too much but Chang yen yoshii atado
shall do it hey dual he's lost too much
blood
Chang Yin do see a typo we must give him
a transfusion immediately eg in Kumi de
condado de jong shin Kwong hai chew and
daifuku yahoo xie na koto de marzo sushi
yahooza tissue massage sushi
so what is read towards you mayor should
any instrument wash your ocean link
highlight Josh awho by Joe and I foo
generate the schwre Shoalwater you
should remember the verb Joe remember
Joe remember from an earlier lesson
see it's all coming back all the stuff
we did in the earlier lessons comes up
later on if you remember the meaning of
Cho you have half a chance at guessing
the meaning of the sentence
[Music]